I was serving at the Austria branch from about mid-70s to 1990.
We had a small department that was assigned to help certain countries east and Europe.
And that included visiting the brothers on the ban, bringing them spiritual food,
having secret meetings with them, and also the strengths of the local organization
that was exposed to persecution and ban.
We would print books on Bible paper and miniature size.
This way more books or literature could be taken to these countries.
The couriers, they transported literature to these countries in their own private cars.
This way hundreds of books could be transported.
At the border, if a courier would be found transporting literature,
they would interrogate the driver.
But these brothers were trained.
They knew what to say to protect the work and not give away any secrets.
Usually, after a day or two days, the officials would let them go back home to the home country.
But not with their car. They had to have public transportation.
Because the cars would be confiscated.
But the brothers had a spiritual sacrifice. They were willing to waste that.
But the majority got through, and actually every year thousands of miniature books were transported secretly to eastern Europe.
So it was not just a matter of us being so clever in hiding things, getting it to the brothers.
But we were always fully convinced and had evidence that it was Jehovah's Holy Spirit that helped us.
Also, we transported stencils for local production, so that in their countries they could reproduce the same material with mimeographing machines.
In most cases, the mimeographing machines were transported secretly by the couriers.
The other method was to build it within the country.
I remember there was a brother that was a very skilled engineer.
And under his direction, they decided to build it themselves.
So they were self-made, offset printing presses.
The brothers had a number of underground printers that they had dug out under their own homes.
In many cases, the brothers had to do what they did during the night.
Because in communist countries, they had to go during the day to a factory or whatever else and do some secular work.
But it testifies to the great spirit of sacrifice that the brothers showed to forfeit so much of their private life as a family to do at night the printing of the spiritual faulty.
Some had only a few hours of sleep.
But they loved Jehovah and the brothers so much that they did it.
There was no kingdom hall.
The brothers had secret meetings in private homes and they would not all come at the same time.
Because if the neighbors would see certain persons all the time going to a specific house, there could be suspicions.
And every week, they had the meetings in a different home of the brothers.
And this helped to protect the work so that it could be kept secret.
Singing was very important for the brothers.
And they didn't have to have a song in hand.
They knew the texts of the song by heart.
And immediately, saying a number, they could sing the song.
That affected the heart, the emotions of the brothers.
So they were strengthened in their determination to be faithful.
A lot of pressure was on the brothers in Romania.
The Communist Party, they tried to so distrust among the brothers,
meeting with them separately and telling some brothers one thing, telling other brothers something else.
Sometimes it has happened that an official posed as an interested person
and was clever enough to disguise that and pretend to make progress in the truth.
Not only to the point of getting baptized, but even to the point of becoming an elder.
But he was in reality an agent of the secret police, with the aim to find out everything about the organization.
So it did lead in one case that brothers started to distrust someone that was actually appointed by headquarters.
And these brothers then separated from the organization that Jehovah used.
And some of them were separated for not just a few years, but for decades.
And they were a large number, up to 5,000 publishers.
They continued to meet together. They were preaching and using material that they had left over from earlier years.
But they hardly got any new material to study because they were not in touch with the organization that was used for headquarters.
Attempts to bring the brothers back into the organization were made from time to time.
But it seemed that the brothers from the separated organization did not have sufficient trust.
But when we presented to the leader of the separated group that one from the governing body would come,
he was happy about that and he had enough trust in that case to agree that we should have a meeting
and seriously talk about reunification.
And so from the separated group, there were Brother Albu, who was the leader, and four of his main elders.
And from our side, there was Brother Jeris, our translator, and I was part of that group.
Also, there were several from the country committee of Romania.
I remember the first night there was a lot of accusations about what the others had done and not done,
which did not create the best spirit. And we mainly listened.
But everybody agreed to meet another night.
And the second night, obviously, Jehovah wanted the brothers to unite again.
And the whole spirit was different and the brothers talked the matters over and clarified some misunderstandings.
And at the end of the second evening, I remember the leader of the separate group, Brother Albu said,
let's do it because if we don't do it now, we may never have another opportunity again.
And so the decision was made.
It doesn't happen every day. The five thousand brothers come back to the organization.
From then on, all the practical things were put in place to accomplish this reunification.
They were asked to merge with our congregations.
And it also took a lot of humility on their part, but they were willing to do it.
So they were really brothers in their heart and loved the truth.
And so the reunification was accomplished. And it was a wonderful victory for Jehovah and against Satan.
Reflecting on the experience with the brothers in Romania, we can see that could always be a misunderstanding among humans.
And there could always be even legitimate complaints about misconduct of some responsible brothers.
But the important thing is never to lose trust that this is Jehovah's organization.
That's where Jehovah's blessing is. Jehovah sees it all.
Jehovah uses his Holy Spirit to keep the organization together.
And what he wants to have accomplished will happen.
And if we work with the Holy Spirit, then Jehovah will bless our efforts and it will be successful to his praise.